Update TIF vignette with 2024 data (#77)
ccao-data/ptaxsim: vignettes/tifs.Rmd

# The Wheeling Town Center II TIF

> Using PTAXSIM, we're going to examine the impact of a single TIF: the Wheeling Town Center II (WTC2) TIF in Wheeling, IL. This TIF was established in 2014 and covers about 200 properties in downtown Wheeling. Since being established, its total increment (property value) has grown substantially; as of tax year 2024, its annual revenue was about $9 million (back when this vignette was first written in 2020, the annual revenue was 5.5 million per year!). We can determine the impact of the WTC2 TIF by recalculating historical tax bills as if it was never created.

Reviewer: **[Suggestion, optional]** Not a huge deal, but it feels to me like the reference to the original publication date of the vignette distracts from the main point. Maybe we could reword this a bit to keep the focus on the growing revenue amount?
 
```suggestion
Using PTAXSIM, we're going to examine the impact of a single TIF: the Wheeling Town Center II (WTC2) TIF in Wheeling, IL. This TIF was established in 2014 and covers about 200 properties in downtown Wheeling. Since being established, its total increment (property value) has grown substantially: in tax year 2020, the TIF raised about $5.5 million per year in tax revenue, while in tax year 2024 its annual revenue grew to $9 million. We can determine the impact of the WTC2 TIF by recalculating historical tax bills as if it was never created.
```

The map shows the TIF district highlighted in <span style="color:#7d26cd"><strong>purple</strong></span>. It covers mostly commercial buildings and a small park. The primary development is called the [Wheeling Town Center](https://thewheelingtowncenter.com/).

### A quick aside: tax codes
### A quick aside: tax codes and the 2024 TIF methodology update

The Wheeling Town Center II TIF was created by layering an additional taxing district boundary onto existing districts. When this happened, a new ***tax code*** was created. A tax code is a 5-digit number that identifies the unique combination of overlapping tax districts for a given area.
The Wheeling Town Center II TIF was created by layering an additional taxing district boundary onto existing districts. When this happened, a new ***tax code*** was created. A tax code is a 5-digit number that identifies the unique combination of overlapping tax districts for a given area. All PINs within the same tax code will have the same composite tax rate, but it is possible for multiple tax codes to represent the same combination of taxing districts.

> In 2014, the tax code for each PIN within the WTC2 TIF changed to represent their new, unique tax situation. This process is important to understand when dealing with TIFs, especially when calculating counterfactual scenarios.

Reviewer: **[Question, non-blocking]** The new text is great, but it omits this paragraph, which emphasizes that tax codes will change at the time of TIF formation and counterfactuals need to handle that change. Is that exclusion intentional?

Author: Hmmm actually I'm not sure I thought that through much when I deleted it - I will add this back in.

```{r}
tif_pins_vec <- DBI::dbGetQuery(
  ptaxsim_db_conn,
  glue::glue_sql("
    SELECT DISTINCT pin
    FROM pin
    WHERE tax_code_num IN ({unique(tif_dists_pre_24$tax_code_num)*})
  ",
    .con = ptaxsim_db_conn
  )
) %>%
  pull(pin)

tif_pins_dt <- lookup_pin(2006:2023, pin = tif_pins_vec) %>%
  mutate(tax_code = lookup_tax_code(year, pin))
```

We can determine the amount of increment by comparing the total property value in the TIF (in EAV) to the frozen amount. Anything above the frozen amount is taxed by the TIF.

The code below sums up the total EAV of all PINs within the TIF year by year. This is done differently for the pre-2024 and 2024 data, which is ultimately bound together into one dataset.
```{r}
tif_pins_summ <- tif_pins_dt %>%
  group_by(year, tax_code) %>%
  summarize(total_eav = sum(eav)) %>%
  left_join(tif_dists_pre_24, by = c("tax_code" = "tax_code_num", "year")) %>%
  mutate(tax_code_increment_eav = total_eav - tax_code_frozen_eav) %>%

>   group_by(year) %>%

Reviewer: **[Thought, non-blocking]** Clarifying this change for posterity: The previous version of this transformation pipeline worked under the assumption that the Wheeling Town Center II TIF only had one tax code, in which case it was appropriate to group by `(year)` instead of `(year, tax_code)`. In subsequent years since we last refreshed the vignette, the TIF has added additional tax codes, so we need to compute the increment at the tax code level before aggregating it by year.

```{r}

> # Create polygon to highlight the increment taxed by the TIF

Reviewer: **[Suggestion, optional]** We might as well document this since it confused us:

```suggestion
# Create polygon to highlight the increment taxed by the TIF.
# Make sure the terminating point duplicates the final X-axis value (year)
# while returning to the first Y-axis value (total EAV) in order to properly
# close the polygon
```

plot_pin_fill <- tibble(

>   x = c(2014, 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, 2023, 2024, 2024),

Reviewer: **[Nitpick, optional]** Slightly more succinct, as long as we're here:

```suggestion
  x = c(2014:2024, 2024),
```
